ported-apps/grand-perspective/README.md, before:

# GrandPerspective for Tsyne

**Disk Usage Visualization with Interactive Treemap**

Visualize your disk usage in real-time with an interactive treemap showing file and folder sizes as colored rectangles. Each rectangle's area is proportional to the disk space it occupies.

## Original Project

- **Repository**: https://grandperspectiv.sourceforge.net/
- **Platform**: macOS (Objective-C / Cocoa)
- **Author**: Erwin Bonsma
- **License**: GNU General Public License (GPL-2.0)
- **Download**: https://sourceforge.net/projects/grandperspectiv/

GrandPerspective is a Mac utility that visualizes disk usage using treemap visualization, making it easy to identify which files and folders consume the most space.

## About This Port

This Tsyne port brings the core visualization and interaction model to a cross-platform TypeScript/Fyne GUI framework. The port focuses on:

- **Treemap layout algorithm** using squarified recursive partitioning
- **Interactive canvas** rendering with Cosyne (Tsyne's 2D graphics library)
- **3D visual effects** with beveled rectangle shading (highlights and shadows)
- **Multiple color schemes** (by size, by depth, by type)
- **Directory navigation** with drill-down and parent controls
- **File system scanning** with recursive directory traversal

The port adapts GrandPerspective's mouse-driven interaction (hover, click) to work with Tsyne's event system, while maintaining the visual fidelity through CSS-based color gradients and layered rectangle rendering.

## Key Features

### ✅ Implemented

- **Treemap visualization** - Files/folders rendered as rectangles proportional to size
- **3D beveled rectangles** - Highlights and shadows for visual depth and distinction
- **Three color schemes**:
  - `bySize` - Color intensity based on file/folder size (logarithmic scale)
  - `byDepth` - Color based on directory nesting level (60° hue increments)
  - `byType` - Color by file extension (.ts=red, .js=orange, .md=green, etc.)
- **Interactive drilling** - Click folders to navigate deeper, use "Parent" button to go back
- **Hover effects** - Rectangles highlight on mouse-over with increased saturation
- **Selection state** - Selected rectangles show red border
- **Real-time updates** - Directory scanning with automatic layout regeneration
- **Directory filtering** - Minimum size threshold to avoid clutter in large trees

### ⚠️ Simplified from Original

- **Single directory scan** vs. background incremental scanning
- **Fixed depth limit** (5 levels) vs. unlimited nesting
- **No file watching** - Manual rescan (not real-time updates)
- **No disk utilities** (delete, reveal, etc.)
- **Canvas-based** vs. native OS rendering (different performance characteristics)

## Architecture

### Data Flow

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    User Interactions                        │
│         (button clicks, mouse hover/move, canvas clicks)    │
└──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────┘
                           │
                           ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│           GrandPerspectiveStore (Observable)                │
│  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐ │
│  │ • Manages AppState (rootEntry, colorScheme, etc)      │ │
│  │ • Triggers directory scans                            │ │
│  │ • Handles drill-down/up navigation                    │ │
│  │ • Notifies subscribers on state changes               │ │
│  └────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ │
└──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────┘
                           │
                           ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│              Layout Engine (Treemap Algorithm)              │
│  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐ │
│  │ layoutTreemap() - Squarified recursive partitioning   │ │
│  │ layoutRow() - Row-based rectangle positioning         │ │
│  │ worstAspectRatio() - Aspect ratio quality metric      │ │
│  └────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ │
│                          ▼                                   │
│  Array<TreemapRect> with {x, y, width, height, size}      │
└──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────┘
                           │
                           ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│            Cosyne Canvas Rendering                          │
│  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐ │
│  │ renderShadedRect()                                     │ │
│  │  ├─ Draw highlight edges (top/left, lighter)         │ │
│  │  ├─ Draw shadow edges (bottom/right, darker)         │ │
│  │  └─ Draw main surface (base color)                   │ │
│  │                                                        │ │
│  │ getColor() - Determine base color by scheme           │ │
│  │ lightenColor() / darkenColor() - Shading helpers      │ │
│  └────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Treemap Layout Algorithm

The **squarified treemap algorithm** minimizes aspect ratio of rectangles for better readability:

```
1. Sort items by size (descending)
2. Initialize empty row and rowWidth = containerWidth
3. For each item:
   a. Calculate new row if adding item improves aspect ratio
   b. Otherwise start new row
   c. Recalculate layout direction (horizontal ↔ vertical)
4. Render row with proportional positioning
```

**Example Layout**:

```
Before Drill:                After Drill into Yellow Folder:
┌──────────────────────┐     ┌──────────────────────┐
│     Large Folder     │     │   subfolder1 (50%)   │
│       (70% size)     │     ├────────┬─────────────┤
│                      │     │ file2  │   subfolder2│
│                      │     │ (20%)  │   (30%)     │
├──────┬───────────────┤     └────────┴─────────────┘
│file1 │  Other       │
│(20%) │  (10%)       │
└──────┴───────────────┘
```

### 3D Shading Effect

Each rectangle is composed of 4 layers to create beveled 3D appearance:

```
Layer 1: Shadow (bottom-right)        Layer 2: Shadow (right edge)
┌─────────────┐                       ┌─────────────┐
│             │                       │             │
│             │                       │      ▓▓     │
│             │ ──────────────────→   │      ▓▓     │
│             │                       │      ▓▓     │
└─┐───────────┤                       └──────┘▓     │
  └───────────┘                             └──────┘

Layer 3: Highlight (top-left)         Layer 4: Main Surface
┌─────────────┐                       ┌─────────────┐
│ ░░░░░░░░░   │                       │░░░░░░░░░    │
│ ░░░░░░░░░   │                       │░░░░░░░░░░   │
│             │ ──────────────────→   │             │
│             │                       │             │
└─────────────┤                       └─────────────┤
              │                                     │
              │                                     │
              └─────────────────────────────────────┘
```

Light source positioned at top-left (like classic beveled UI):
- **Highlights**: Lightened color (+20% lightness) on top-right edges
- **Shadows**: Darkened color (-15% lightness) on bottom-right edges
- **Main**: Base color on center surface
- **Bevel size**: 3px (or 1px for small rectangles < 30px wide)

## Usage

### Running the Application

```bash
cd ported-apps/grand-perspective
pnpm test:ui
# or
npx tsx grand-perspective.ts
```

### Controls

| Control | Action |
|---------|--------|
| **Click rectangle** | Select file/folder; drill into directories |
| **Hover** | Highlight rectangle and increase saturation |
| **Parent button** | Navigate to parent directory |
| **by Size button** | Color scheme: size-based (logarithmic intensity) |
| **by Depth button** | Color scheme: nesting depth (rainbow hue) |
| **by Type button** | Color scheme: file type (extension-based) |

### Color Schemes

#### By Size (Default)
```
Logarithmic intensity based on file/folder size:
  0 bytes      ← blue (hue 240°)
  1 MB         ← green (hue 120°)
  10 MB        ← yellow (hue 60°)
  1 GB         ← red (hue 0°)

Color = hsl(hue, 70%, 55%)
Hue calculated: atan(log(size) / log(maxSize)) * 360
```

#### By Depth
```
Directory nesting level → hue rotation:
  Root (depth 0)    ← red (hue 0°)
  Level 1           ← orange (hue 60°)
  Level 2           ← green (hue 120°)
  Level 3           ← cyan (hue 180°)
  Level 4+          ← cycles back

Color = hsl(depth * 60 % 360, 70%, 55%)
```

#### By Type
```
File extension mapping (examples):
  .ts/.tsx      → red (hue 0°)
  .js/.jsx      → orange (hue 30°)
  .json         → yellow (hue 60°)
  .md           → green (hue 120°)
  .png/.jpg     → cyan (hue 180°)
  .mp4          → blue (hue 240°)
  .pdf          → magenta (hue 270°)
  (other)       → magenta (hue 300°)
```

## Testing

### Unit Tests (Jest)

```bash
cd ported-apps/grand-perspective
pnpm test
```

**Coverage**: 50+ tests covering:
- FileEntry creation and properties
- Store initialization and state management
- Observable pattern and subscriptions
- Color scheme management
- Selection and hover tracking
- Directory navigation (drill-down/up)
- Treemap rectangle generation
- Size calculations
- Data immutability
- Edge cases (empty directories, large files, deep nesting)
- State transitions and integration

**Test categories**:
- Structure & initialization (8 tests)
- Subscriptions & observables (4 tests)
- Color schemes (5 tests)
- Selection/hover (4 tests)
- Navigation (4 tests)
- Layout & sizing (6 tests)
- Immutability (2 tests)
- ID generation (2 tests)
- Edge cases (6 tests)
- State transitions (3 tests)
- Integration (3 tests)

### UI Tests (TsyneTest)

```bash
TSYNE_HEADED=1 pnpm test grand-perspective.tsyne.test.ts
```

**Coverage**: 25+ UI interaction tests covering:
- Initial render verification
- Button visibility and clickability
- Canvas rendering
- Color scheme switching
- Window lifecycle
- Stress tests (rapid clicks, multiple schemes)
- UI state consistency
- Layout validation
- Robustness (20+ consecutive interactions)
- Performance benchmarks

### Running Tests with Screenshots

```bash
TAKE_SCREENSHOTS=1 pnpm test:ui
```

Generates screenshots for:
- Initial application state
- By Size color scheme
- By Depth color scheme
- By Type color scheme

## File Structure

```
grand-perspective/
├── grand-perspective.ts             # Main application (550+ lines)
│   ├── FileEntry interface          # Directory tree data structure
│   ├── TreemapRect interface        # Layout output rectangles
│   ├── AppState interface           # UI state management
│   ├── GrandPerspectiveStore class  # Observable store
│   ├── Layout algorithm             # Treemap partitioning
│   ├── Color utilities              # HSL manipulation
│   ├── 3D shading                   # Beveled rectangle rendering
│   └── buildGrandPerspectiveApp()   # Main UI builder
│
├── grand-perspective.test.ts        # Jest unit tests (50+ tests)
│   ├── FileEntry tests
│   ├── Store initialization
│   ├── Store subscriptions
│   ├── Color management
│   ├── Selection/hover state
│   ├── Navigation (drill-down/up)
│   ├── Layout generation
│   ├── Size calculations
│   ├── Data immutability
│   ├── Edge cases
│   └── Integration tests
│
├── grand-perspective.tsyne.test.ts  # UI tests (25+ tests)
│   ├── Initial render tests
│   ├── Button interaction
│   ├── Canvas rendering
│   ├── Window lifecycle
│   ├── Stress tests
│   ├── State consistency
│   ├── Robustness tests
│   └── Screenshot tests
│
├── jest.config.js                   # Jest configuration
├── tsconfig.json                    # TypeScript configuration
├── package.json                     # Dependencies and scripts
└── README.md                        # This file
```

## Implementation Details

### Store Pattern

Following Tsyne ported-apps conventions, state management uses the **Observable Store pattern**:

```typescript
class GrandPerspectiveStore {
  private state: AppState;
  private changeListeners: ChangeListener[] = [];

  subscribe(listener: ChangeListener): () => void {
    this.changeListeners.push(listener);
    return () => { this.changeListeners.filter(l => l !== listener); };
  }

  private notifyChange(): void {
    this.changeListeners.forEach(l => l());
  }

  // All mutations trigger notifyChange()
  setColorScheme(scheme) { ... notifyChange(); }
  setSelected(id) { ... notifyChange(); }
  drillDown(id) { ... notifyChange(); }
}
```

**Key principles**:
- State is immutable (new arrays/objects on changes)
- All mutations trigger listeners
- UI subscribes to store changes
- Canvas refreshes via `refreshAllCosyneContexts()`

### Treemap Algorithm Performance

- **Time complexity**: O(n log n) for sorting + O(n) for layout
- **Space complexity**: O(n) for output rectangles
- **Typical performance**:
  - 1,000 files: ~5ms layout time
  - 10,000 files: ~50ms layout time
  - 100,000 files: ~500ms (with filtering for visibility)

### Directory Scanning

- **Synchronous stat calls** for simplicity (can be async for large trees)
- **Maximum depth**: 5 levels (configurable in `scanDirectory()`)
- **Permission handling**: Skips directories with access denied
- **Size calculation**: Recursive summation (optimizable with caching)

## Limitations

1. **Single-threaded scanning** - UI blocks during directory scan
2. **Memory usage** - Entire tree loaded in memory
3. **No incremental updates** - Full rescan required for changes
4. **Bevel shading overhead** - 4× more rectangles than flat rendering
5. **Text truncation** - Names > 20 chars abbreviated
6. **No sorting options** - Fixed size-descending sort

## Future Enhancements

- [ ] Background scanning thread for large directories
- [ ] Virtual scrolling for massive trees (100k+ files)
- [ ] File deletion/move operations
- [ ] Persistent favorites/bookmarks
- [ ] Search and filter by name/type
- [ ] Export statistics to CSV/JSON
- [ ] Animated transitions between color schemes
- [ ] Right-click context menus (open, trash, etc.)
- [ ] Zoom levels with smooth panning
- [ ] Dark/light theme support

## Original Project Attribution

This port is derived from [GrandPerspective](https://grandperspectiv.sourceforge.net/) by Erwin Bonsma, licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL-2.0).

The original application and its source code are available on SourceForge:
https://sourceforge.net/projects/grandperspectiv/

## License

This Tsyne port is released under the **MIT License** to match Tsyne's licensing model.

```
MIT License

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.
```

## References

- **Tsyne Documentation**: `/docs/API_REFERENCE.md`, `/docs/pseudo-declarative-ui-composition.md`
- **Cosyne Canvas**: `/cosyne/src/primitives/`
- **Observable Store Pattern**: `/docs/PATTERNS.md` (MVC section)
- **Treemap Visualization**: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treemapping
- **Squarified Treemap Algorithm**: https://www.win.tue.nl/~vanwijk/stm.pdf

## See Also

Other ported apps in the Tsyne repository demonstrate similar patterns:
- **Chess**: Game logic with observable state
- **Boing**: Sprite animation and physics
- **Notes**: File I/O and persistent storage
- **Prime Grid Visualizer**: Mathematical visualization similar to treemaps
- **Spherical Snake**: 3D projection with canvas rendering (see cosyne/ for similar techniques)

Commit message:

Update copyright notices for GrandPerspective port
Add proper dual copyright attribution across all files:
- LICENSE: "Portions copyright © Erwin Bonsma (GrandPerspective original)"
          "Portions copyright © Paul Hammant 2026 (Tsyne port)"
- README.md: Updated attribution section with copyright holders
- grand-perspective.ts: File header with copyright and attribution
- grand-perspective.test.ts: Test file header with copyright
- grand-perspective.tsyne.test.ts: UI test header with copyright

Clear separation of original GPL-2.0 work from MIT-licensed port,
while maintaining appropriate credit to original author and current maintainer.

ported-apps/grand-perspective/README.md, after:

# GrandPerspective for Tsyne

**Disk Usage Visualization with Interactive Treemap**

Visualize your disk usage in real-time with an interactive treemap showing file and folder sizes as colored rectangles. Each rectangle's area is proportional to the disk space it occupies.

## Original Project

- **Repository**: https://grandperspectiv.sourceforge.net/
- **Platform**: macOS (Objective-C / Cocoa)
- **Author**: Erwin Bonsma
- **License**: GNU General Public License (GPL-2.0)
- **Download**: https://sourceforge.net/projects/grandperspectiv/

GrandPerspective is a Mac utility that visualizes disk usage using treemap visualization, making it easy to identify which files and folders consume the most space.

## About This Port

This Tsyne port brings the core visualization and interaction model to a cross-platform TypeScript/Fyne GUI framework. The port focuses on:

- **Treemap layout algorithm** using squarified recursive partitioning
- **Interactive canvas** rendering with Cosyne (Tsyne's 2D graphics library)
- **3D visual effects** with beveled rectangle shading (highlights and shadows)
- **Multiple color schemes** (by size, by depth, by type)
- **Directory navigation** with drill-down and parent controls
- **File system scanning** with recursive directory traversal

The port adapts GrandPerspective's mouse-driven interaction (hover, click) to work with Tsyne's event system, while maintaining the visual fidelity through CSS-based color gradients and layered rectangle rendering.

## Key Features

### ✅ Implemented

- **Treemap visualization** - Files/folders rendered as rectangles proportional to size
- **3D beveled rectangles** - Highlights and shadows for visual depth and distinction
- **Three color schemes**:
  - `bySize` - Color intensity based on file/folder size (logarithmic scale)
  - `byDepth` - Color based on directory nesting level (60° hue increments)
  - `byType` - Color by file extension (.ts=red, .js=orange, .md=green, etc.)
- **Interactive drilling** - Click folders to navigate deeper, use "Parent" button to go back
- **Hover effects** - Rectangles highlight on mouse-over with increased saturation
- **Selection state** - Selected rectangles show red border
- **Real-time updates** - Directory scanning with automatic layout regeneration
- **Directory filtering** - Minimum size threshold to avoid clutter in large trees

### ⚠️ Simplified from Original

- **Single directory scan** vs. background incremental scanning
- **Fixed depth limit** (5 levels) vs. unlimited nesting
- **No file watching** - Manual rescan (not real-time updates)
- **No disk utilities** (delete, reveal, etc.)
- **Canvas-based** vs. native OS rendering (different performance characteristics)

## Architecture

### Data Flow

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    User Interactions                        │
│         (button clicks, mouse hover/move, canvas clicks)    │
└──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────┘
                           │
                           ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│           GrandPerspectiveStore (Observable)                │
│  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐ │
│  │ • Manages AppState (rootEntry, colorScheme, etc)      │ │
│  │ • Triggers directory scans                            │ │
│  │ • Handles drill-down/up navigation                    │ │
│  │ • Notifies subscribers on state changes               │ │
│  └────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ │
└──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────┘
                           │
                           ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│              Layout Engine (Treemap Algorithm)              │
│  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐ │
│  │ layoutTreemap() - Squarified recursive partitioning   │ │
│  │ layoutRow() - Row-based rectangle positioning         │ │
│  │ worstAspectRatio() - Aspect ratio quality metric      │ │
│  └────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ │
│                          ▼                                   │
│  Array<TreemapRect> with {x, y, width, height, size}      │
└──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────┘
                           │
                           ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│            Cosyne Canvas Rendering                          │
│  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐ │
│  │ renderShadedRect()                                     │ │
│  │  ├─ Draw highlight edges (top/left, lighter)         │ │
│  │  ├─ Draw shadow edges (bottom/right, darker)         │ │
│  │  └─ Draw main surface (base color)                   │ │
│  │                                                        │ │
│  │ getColor() - Determine base color by scheme           │ │
│  │ lightenColor() / darkenColor() - Shading helpers      │ │
│  └────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Treemap Layout Algorithm

The **squarified treemap algorithm** minimizes aspect ratio of rectangles for better readability:

```
1. Sort items by size (descending)
2. Initialize empty row and rowWidth = containerWidth
3. For each item:
   a. Calculate new row if adding item improves aspect ratio
   b. Otherwise start new row
   c. Recalculate layout direction (horizontal ↔ vertical)
4. Render row with proportional positioning
```

**Example Layout**:

```
Before Drill:                After Drill into Yellow Folder:
┌──────────────────────┐     ┌──────────────────────┐
│     Large Folder     │     │   subfolder1 (50%)   │
│       (70% size)     │     ├────────┬─────────────┤
│                      │     │ file2  │   subfolder2│
│                      │     │ (20%)  │   (30%)     │
├──────┬───────────────┤     └────────┴─────────────┘
│file1 │  Other       │
│(20%) │  (10%)       │
└──────┴───────────────┘
```

### 3D Shading Effect

Each rectangle is composed of 4 layers to create beveled 3D appearance:

```
Layer 1: Shadow (bottom-right)        Layer 2: Shadow (right edge)
┌─────────────┐                       ┌─────────────┐
│             │                       │             │
│             │                       │      ▓▓     │
│             │ ──────────────────→   │      ▓▓     │
│             │                       │      ▓▓     │
└─┐───────────┤                       └──────┘▓     │
  └───────────┘                             └──────┘

Layer 3: Highlight (top-left)         Layer 4: Main Surface
┌─────────────┐                       ┌─────────────┐
│ ░░░░░░░░░   │                       │░░░░░░░░░    │
│ ░░░░░░░░░   │                       │░░░░░░░░░░   │
│             │ ──────────────────→   │             │
│             │                       │             │
└─────────────┤                       └─────────────┤
              │                                     │
              │                                     │
              └─────────────────────────────────────┘
```

Light source positioned at top-left (like classic beveled UI):
- **Highlights**: Lightened color (+20% lightness) on top-right edges
- **Shadows**: Darkened color (-15% lightness) on bottom-right edges
- **Main**: Base color on center surface
- **Bevel size**: 3px (or 1px for small rectangles < 30px wide)

## Usage

### Running the Application

```bash
cd ported-apps/grand-perspective
pnpm test:ui
# or
npx tsx grand-perspective.ts
```

### Controls

| Control | Action |
|---------|--------|
| **Click rectangle** | Select file/folder; drill into directories |
| **Hover** | Highlight rectangle and increase saturation |
| **Parent button** | Navigate to parent directory |
| **by Size button** | Color scheme: size-based (logarithmic intensity) |
| **by Depth button** | Color scheme: nesting depth (rainbow hue) |
| **by Type button** | Color scheme: file type (extension-based) |

### Color Schemes

#### By Size (Default)
```
Logarithmic intensity based on file/folder size:
  0 bytes      ← blue (hue 240°)
  1 MB         ← green (hue 120°)
  10 MB        ← yellow (hue 60°)
  1 GB         ← red (hue 0°)

Color = hsl(hue, 70%, 55%)
Hue calculated: atan(log(size) / log(maxSize)) * 360
```

#### By Depth
```
Directory nesting level → hue rotation:
  Root (depth 0)    ← red (hue 0°)
  Level 1           ← orange (hue 60°)
  Level 2           ← green (hue 120°)
  Level 3           ← cyan (hue 180°)
  Level 4+          ← cycles back

Color = hsl(depth * 60 % 360, 70%, 55%)
```

#### By Type
```
File extension mapping (examples):
  .ts/.tsx      → red (hue 0°)
  .js/.jsx      → orange (hue 30°)
  .json         → yellow (hue 60°)
  .md           → green (hue 120°)
  .png/.jpg     → cyan (hue 180°)
  .mp4          → blue (hue 240°)
  .pdf          → magenta (hue 270°)
  (other)       → magenta (hue 300°)
```

## Testing

### Unit Tests (Jest)

```bash
cd ported-apps/grand-perspective
pnpm test
```

**Coverage**: 50+ tests covering:
- FileEntry creation and properties
- Store initialization and state management
- Observable pattern and subscriptions
- Color scheme management
- Selection and hover tracking
- Directory navigation (drill-down/up)
- Treemap rectangle generation
- Size calculations
- Data immutability
- Edge cases (empty directories, large files, deep nesting)
- State transitions and integration

**Test categories**:
- Structure & initialization (8 tests)
- Subscriptions & observables (4 tests)
- Color schemes (5 tests)
- Selection/hover (4 tests)
- Navigation (4 tests)
- Layout & sizing (6 tests)
- Immutability (2 tests)
- ID generation (2 tests)
- Edge cases (6 tests)
- State transitions (3 tests)
- Integration (3 tests)

### UI Tests (TsyneTest)

```bash
TSYNE_HEADED=1 pnpm test grand-perspective.tsyne.test.ts
```

**Coverage**: 25+ UI interaction tests covering:
- Initial render verification
- Button visibility and clickability
- Canvas rendering
- Color scheme switching
- Window lifecycle
- Stress tests (rapid clicks, multiple schemes)
- UI state consistency
- Layout validation
- Robustness (20+ consecutive interactions)
- Performance benchmarks

### Running Tests with Screenshots

```bash
TAKE_SCREENSHOTS=1 pnpm test:ui
```

Generates screenshots for:
- Initial application state
- By Size color scheme
- By Depth color scheme
- By Type color scheme

## File Structure

```
grand-perspective/
├── grand-perspective.ts             # Main application (550+ lines)
│   ├── FileEntry interface          # Directory tree data structure
│   ├── TreemapRect interface        # Layout output rectangles
│   ├── AppState interface           # UI state management
│   ├── GrandPerspectiveStore class  # Observable store
│   ├── Layout algorithm             # Treemap partitioning
│   ├── Color utilities              # HSL manipulation
│   ├── 3D shading                   # Beveled rectangle rendering
│   └── buildGrandPerspectiveApp()   # Main UI builder
│
├── grand-perspective.test.ts        # Jest unit tests (50+ tests)
│   ├── FileEntry tests
│   ├── Store initialization
│   ├── Store subscriptions
│   ├── Color management
│   ├── Selection/hover state
│   ├── Navigation (drill-down/up)
│   ├── Layout generation
│   ├── Size calculations
│   ├── Data immutability
│   ├── Edge cases
│   └── Integration tests
│
├── grand-perspective.tsyne.test.ts  # UI tests (25+ tests)
│   ├── Initial render tests
│   ├── Button interaction
│   ├── Canvas rendering
│   ├── Window lifecycle
│   ├── Stress tests
│   ├── State consistency
│   ├── Robustness tests
│   └── Screenshot tests
│
├── jest.config.js                   # Jest configuration
├── tsconfig.json                    # TypeScript configuration
├── package.json                     # Dependencies and scripts
└── README.md                        # This file
```

## Implementation Details

### Store Pattern

Following Tsyne ported-apps conventions, state management uses the **Observable Store pattern**:

```typescript
class GrandPerspectiveStore {
  private state: AppState;
  private changeListeners: ChangeListener[] = [];

  subscribe(listener: ChangeListener): () => void {
    this.changeListeners.push(listener);
    return () => { this.changeListeners.filter(l => l !== listener); };
  }

  private notifyChange(): void {
    this.changeListeners.forEach(l => l());
  }

  // All mutations trigger notifyChange()
  setColorScheme(scheme) { ... notifyChange(); }
  setSelected(id) { ... notifyChange(); }
  drillDown(id) { ... notifyChange(); }
}
```

**Key principles**:
- State is immutable (new arrays/objects on changes)
- All mutations trigger listeners
- UI subscribes to store changes
- Canvas refreshes via `refreshAllCosyneContexts()`

### Treemap Algorithm Performance

- **Time complexity**: O(n log n) for sorting + O(n) for layout
- **Space complexity**: O(n) for output rectangles
- **Typical performance**:
  - 1,000 files: ~5ms layout time
  - 10,000 files: ~50ms layout time
  - 100,000 files: ~500ms (with filtering for visibility)

### Directory Scanning

- **Synchronous stat calls** for simplicity (can be async for large trees)
- **Maximum depth**: 5 levels (configurable in `scanDirectory()`)
- **Permission handling**: Skips directories with access denied
- **Size calculation**: Recursive summation (optimizable with caching)

## Limitations

1. **Single-threaded scanning** - UI blocks during directory scan
2. **Memory usage** - Entire tree loaded in memory
3. **No incremental updates** - Full rescan required for changes
4. **Bevel shading overhead** - 4× more rectangles than flat rendering
5. **Text truncation** - Names > 20 chars abbreviated
6. **No sorting options** - Fixed size-descending sort

## Future Enhancements

- [ ] Background scanning thread for large directories
- [ ] Virtual scrolling for massive trees (100k+ files)
- [ ] File deletion/move operations
- [ ] Persistent favorites/bookmarks
- [ ] Search and filter by name/type
- [ ] Export statistics to CSV/JSON
- [ ] Animated transitions between color schemes
- [ ] Right-click context menus (open, trash, etc.)
- [ ] Zoom levels with smooth panning
- [ ] Dark/light theme support

## Original Project Attribution

**Portions copyright © Erwin Bonsma (GrandPerspective original)**
**Portions copyright © Paul Hammant 2026 (Tsyne port)**

This Tsyne port is derived from [GrandPerspective](https://grandperspectiv.sourceforge.net/) by Erwin Bonsma, licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL-2.0).

The original application and its source code are available on SourceForge:
https://sourceforge.net/projects/grandperspectiv/

## License

This Tsyne port is released under the **MIT License** to match Tsyne's licensing model, with credit to the original GPL-2.0 licensed work.

```
MIT License

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.
```

## References

- **Tsyne Documentation**: `/docs/API_REFERENCE.md`, `/docs/pseudo-declarative-ui-composition.md`
- **Cosyne Canvas**: `/cosyne/src/primitives/`
- **Observable Store Pattern**: `/docs/PATTERNS.md` (MVC section)
- **Treemap Visualization**: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treemapping
- **Squarified Treemap Algorithm**: https://www.win.tue.nl/~vanwijk/stm.pdf

## See Also

Other ported apps in the Tsyne repository demonstrate similar patterns:
- **Chess**: Game logic with observable state
- **Boing**: Sprite animation and physics
- **Notes**: File I/O and persistent storage
- **Prime Grid Visualizer**: Mathematical visualization similar to treemaps
- **Spherical Snake**: 3D projection with canvas rendering (see cosyne/ for similar techniques)
