phone-apps/markers-demo/README.md, before:

# Line Markers Demo

**Interactive visualization of line markers for directed graphs and flow diagrams**

Demonstrates D3/SVG-style markers on line and path endpoints for creating directed graphs, flowcharts, state machines, and network topology diagrams.

## Features

- **5 diagram types**: Flowchart, directed graph, state machine, network topology, marker showcase
- **6 built-in markers**: Arrow, circle, square, triangle, diamond, bar
- **8 custom markers**: Double arrow, open arrow, curved arrow, reverse arrow, cross, tee, open circle, filled square
- **Interactive switching** between diagram types
- **Label toggle** for readability
- **Reactive bindings** for dynamic marker changes

## Marker Types

### Built-in Markers

| Type | Usage | Visual |
|------|-------|--------|
| **arrow** | Standard directional indicator | → |
| **circle** | Generic node connection | ⚬ |
| **square** | Block/state indicator | ◼ |
| **triangle** | Direction alternative | ▶ |
| **diamond** | Decision/junction point | ◆ |
| **bar** | Blocking/blocking flow | \| |

### Custom Markers (SVG Paths)

| Type | Usage | Visual |
|------|-------|--------|
| **doubleArrow** | Bidirectional flow | ⇒ |
| **openArrow** | Outline style | ▷ |
| **curvedArrow** | Arc path connections | ↻ |
| **reverseArrow** | Backward direction | ← |
| **cross** | Negation/prohibition | ✕ |
| **tee** | T-junction | ⊤ |
| **openCircle** | Outline circle | ○ |
| **filledSquare** | Solid block | ■ |

## Diagram Types

### Flowchart
```
     Start
       ↓
    Process
       ↓
      OK? ─→ Success
       ↓
     Retry
       ↑
   (feedback loop)
```

Standard process flow with decision point, feedback loop.

### Directed Graph
```
   A → B → C
   ↓   ↓   ↑
   D → E ──┘
```

Acyclic directed graph (DAG) showing node dependencies and data flow.

### State Machine
```
Idle ↻    ←─ Running ──→ Done
      ╲   ↙
       Paused
```

State transitions with self-loops, bidirectional arrows, and reset paths.

### Network Topology
```
    Client A
      ↑ ↓
    Server
      ↑ ↓
    Client B     Client C
                  ↑ ↓
                Client D
```

Central server with bidirectional client connections.

### Custom Markers Showcase
```
Line with ⇒  Line with ▷  Line with ↻  ...
Line with ←  Line with ✕  Line with ⊤  ...
```

Displays all available markers for reference.

## Usage

Run the demo:

```bash
npx tsx phone-apps/markers-demo/markers-demo.ts
```

## Controls

| Control | Effect |
|---------|--------|
| Diagram buttons | Switch between 5 diagram types |
| "Show labels" checkbox | Toggle label visibility |
| Diagram displays | Real-time rendering of selected diagram |

## API Usage

### Simple Arrow

```typescript
import { cosyne } from 'cosyne';

a.canvasStack(() => {
  const ctx = cosyne(a, (c) => {
    // Arrow pointing right
    c.line(50, 100, 200, 100)
      .stroke('#333333', 2)
      .endMarker('arrow', 10, '#FF6B6B')
      .withId('directed-line');
  });
});
```

### Bidirectional with Labels

```typescript
c.line(100, 50, 300, 50)
  .stroke('#4ECDC4', 2)
  .startMarker('arrow', 8)
  .endMarker('arrow', 8)
  .withId('bidirectional');

c.text(150, 35, '↔ Bidirectional')
  .fill('#4ECDC4');
```

### State Diagram with Custom Markers

```typescript
import { CUSTOM_MARKERS } from 'cosyne';

// Feedback loop with curved arrow
c.line(50, 50, 200, 150)
  .stroke('#FF6B6B', 2)
  .endMarker(CUSTOM_MARKERS.curvedArrow, 12)
  .withId('feedback');

// Transition with tee marker
c.line(200, 150, 200, 250)
  .stroke('#FFD93D', 2)
  .endMarker(CUSTOM_MARKERS.tee, 10)
  .withId('junction');
```

### Reactive Markers

```typescript
// Marker changes based on state
c.line(50, 50, 200, 50)
  .stroke('#4ECDC4', 2)
  .bindEndMarker(() => ({
    type: state.isActive ? 'arrow' : 'circle',
    size: 10,
    color: state.isActive ? '#FF6B6B' : '#999999',
    alpha: 1
  }));
```

### Custom Path Markers

```typescript
const myMarker = {
  path: 'M 0,0 L -10,-5 L -10,5 Z',  // SVG path
  width: 10,
  height: 10,
  refX: 10,    // Where line connects
  refY: 5,
};

c.line(0, 0, 100, 0)
  .stroke('#333333', 2)
  .endMarker(myMarker, 12, '#FF6B6B');
```

### Flowchart with Path Markers

```typescript
// Process box
c.rect(50, 50, 100, 60)
  .fill('#FF6B6B')
  .stroke('#333333', 2);

c.text(100, 85, 'Process').fill('#FFFFFF');

// Arrow out
c.line(100, 110, 100, 160)
  .stroke('#333333', 2)
  .endMarker('arrow', 10)
  .withId('process-output');

// Decision diamond
c.polygon(100, 200, [
  {x: 100, y: 160},
  {x: 140, y: 200},
  {x: 100, y: 240},
  {x: 60, y: 200}
])
  .fill('#FFD93D')
  .stroke('#333333', 2);

c.text(100, 205, 'OK?').fill('#333333');

// Two outputs
c.line(140, 200, 200, 200)
  .stroke('#4ECDC4', 2)
  .endMarker('arrow', 8)
  .withId('yes-path');

c.text(165, 190, 'Yes').fill('#4ECDC4');

c.line(100, 240, 100, 290)
  .stroke('#FF6B6B', 2)
  .endMarker('arrow', 8)
  .withId('no-path');

c.text(115, 265, 'No').fill('#FF6B6B');
```

## Files

- `markers-demo.ts` - Main application with 5 diagram types
- `README.md` - This file

## API Reference

### Line Primitive

```typescript
c.line(x1, y1, x2, y2)
  .startMarker(type, size, color, alpha)   // Marker at start point
  .endMarker(type, size, color, alpha)     // Marker at end point
  .bindStartMarker(() => config)           // Reactive start marker
  .bindEndMarker(() => config)             // Reactive end marker
```

### Path Primitive

```typescript
c.path(x, y, pathString)
  .startMarker(type, size, color, alpha)
  .endMarker(type, size, color, alpha)
  .bindStartMarker(() => config)
  .bindEndMarker(() => config)
```

### Marker Types

**Built-in:**
```typescript
type BuiltInMarkerType = 'arrow' | 'circle' | 'square' | 'triangle' | 'diamond' | 'bar'
```

**Custom:**
```typescript
interface CustomMarker {
  path: string;           // SVG path data
  width: number;
  height: number;
  refX: number;          // Attachment point X
  refY: number;          // Attachment point Y
}
```

**Preset customs:**
```typescript
import { CUSTOM_MARKERS } from 'cosyne';
// doubleArrow, openArrow, curvedArrow, reverseArrow
// cross, tee, openCircle, filledSquare
```

### Marker Config

```typescript
interface MarkerConfig {
  type: MarkerType;
  size?: number;       // Default: 10
  color?: string;      // Default: inherits stroke color
  alpha?: number;      // Default: 1
}
```

## Performance

- **Rendering**: O(1) per marker (minimal canvas operations)
- **Binding updates**: O(1) per binding refresh
- **Memory**: ~1KB per marker instance
- **Complex diagrams**: 100+ lines with markers at 60fps

## Real-World Use Cases

1. **UML Diagrams** - Class relationships, state machines
2. **Flowcharts** - Process flows, decision trees
3. **Network Diagrams** - Topology, data flow
4. **Dependency Graphs** - Build systems, module dependencies
5. **State Machines** - Protocol states, FSM visualization
6. **Workflow Systems** - Task graphs, DAGs
7. **Graph Databases** - Node relationships
8. **ERD (Entity-Relationship Diagrams)** - Data schemas

## Design Notes

### SVG vs Canvas

**SVG** (native):
- Markers defined separately as reusable elements
- Automatic scaling and rotation
- Requires DOM manipulation

**Cosyne** (Canvas-based):
- Markers rendered inline per line
- Manual scaling and rotation handling
- Pure canvas drawing (no DOM overhead)
- Better for game-like interactions

### Why Markers Matter

Markers communicate flow direction and relationship types:
- **→** (arrow) = one-way causality
- **↔** (double arrow) = bidirectional communication
- **⚬** (circle) = connection point
- **⊤** (tee) = junction/branching
- **✕** (cross) = negation/blocking

Without markers, directed graphs become ambiguous.

## Test

```bash
TAKE_SCREENSHOTS=1 pnpm test -- phone-apps/markers-demo/__tests__/index.test.ts
```

## See Also

- [Markers API Documentation](../../cosyne/D3_MARKERS.md)
- [Jest Tests](../../cosyne/test/markers.test.ts)
- [SVG Marker Element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/SVG/Element/marker)
- [D3.js Marker Documentation](https://github.com/d3/d3-shape)

Commit message:

Add screenshot directories and update demo READMEs
- Created screenshots/ directories in all demo apps for co-locating images with code
- Added screenshot image placeholders to all READMEs
- Added Test sections showing how to run TsyneTest integration tests
- Added Screenshots sections with instructions for generating screenshots
- Screenshots can be generated by running tests in headed mode (TSYNE_HEADED=1)

Demo apps updated:
- scales-demo/
- line-chart-demo/
- markers-demo/
- particles-advanced-demo/
- effects-gradients-clipping-demo/

Screenshots are co-located with demo source code following project convention.

phone-apps/markers-demo/README.md, after:

# Line Markers Demo

**Interactive visualization of line markers for directed graphs and flow diagrams**

Demonstrates D3/SVG-style markers on line and path endpoints for creating directed graphs, flowcharts, state machines, and network topology diagrams.

![Markers Demo](screenshots/markers-demo.png)

## Features

- **5 diagram types**: Flowchart, directed graph, state machine, network topology, marker showcase
- **6 built-in markers**: Arrow, circle, square, triangle, diamond, bar
- **8 custom markers**: Double arrow, open arrow, curved arrow, reverse arrow, cross, tee, open circle, filled square
- **Interactive switching** between diagram types
- **Label toggle** for readability
- **Reactive bindings** for dynamic marker changes

## Marker Types

### Built-in Markers

| Type | Usage | Visual |
|------|-------|--------|
| **arrow** | Standard directional indicator | → |
| **circle** | Generic node connection | ⚬ |
| **square** | Block/state indicator | ◼ |
| **triangle** | Direction alternative | ▶ |
| **diamond** | Decision/junction point | ◆ |
| **bar** | Blocking/blocking flow | \| |

### Custom Markers (SVG Paths)

| Type | Usage | Visual |
|------|-------|--------|
| **doubleArrow** | Bidirectional flow | ⇒ |
| **openArrow** | Outline style | ▷ |
| **curvedArrow** | Arc path connections | ↻ |
| **reverseArrow** | Backward direction | ← |
| **cross** | Negation/prohibition | ✕ |
| **tee** | T-junction | ⊤ |
| **openCircle** | Outline circle | ○ |
| **filledSquare** | Solid block | ■ |

## Diagram Types

### Flowchart
```
     Start
       ↓
    Process
       ↓
      OK? ─→ Success
       ↓
     Retry
       ↑
   (feedback loop)
```

Standard process flow with decision point, feedback loop.

### Directed Graph
```
   A → B → C
   ↓   ↓   ↑
   D → E ──┘
```

Acyclic directed graph (DAG) showing node dependencies and data flow.

### State Machine
```
Idle ↻    ←─ Running ──→ Done
      ╲   ↙
       Paused
```

State transitions with self-loops, bidirectional arrows, and reset paths.

### Network Topology
```
    Client A
      ↑ ↓
    Server
      ↑ ↓
    Client B     Client C
                  ↑ ↓
                Client D
```

Central server with bidirectional client connections.

### Custom Markers Showcase
```
Line with ⇒  Line with ▷  Line with ↻  ...
Line with ←  Line with ✕  Line with ⊤  ...
```

Displays all available markers for reference.

## Usage

Run the demo:

```bash
npx tsx phone-apps/markers-demo/markers-demo.ts
```

## Controls

| Control | Effect |
|---------|--------|
| Diagram buttons | Switch between 5 diagram types |
| "Show labels" checkbox | Toggle label visibility |
| Diagram displays | Real-time rendering of selected diagram |

## API Usage

### Simple Arrow

```typescript
import { cosyne } from 'cosyne';

a.canvasStack(() => {
  const ctx = cosyne(a, (c) => {
    // Arrow pointing right
    c.line(50, 100, 200, 100)
      .stroke('#333333', 2)
      .endMarker('arrow', 10, '#FF6B6B')
      .withId('directed-line');
  });
});
```

### Bidirectional with Labels

```typescript
c.line(100, 50, 300, 50)
  .stroke('#4ECDC4', 2)
  .startMarker('arrow', 8)
  .endMarker('arrow', 8)
  .withId('bidirectional');

c.text(150, 35, '↔ Bidirectional')
  .fill('#4ECDC4');
```

### State Diagram with Custom Markers

```typescript
import { CUSTOM_MARKERS } from 'cosyne';

// Feedback loop with curved arrow
c.line(50, 50, 200, 150)
  .stroke('#FF6B6B', 2)
  .endMarker(CUSTOM_MARKERS.curvedArrow, 12)
  .withId('feedback');

// Transition with tee marker
c.line(200, 150, 200, 250)
  .stroke('#FFD93D', 2)
  .endMarker(CUSTOM_MARKERS.tee, 10)
  .withId('junction');
```

### Reactive Markers

```typescript
// Marker changes based on state
c.line(50, 50, 200, 50)
  .stroke('#4ECDC4', 2)
  .bindEndMarker(() => ({
    type: state.isActive ? 'arrow' : 'circle',
    size: 10,
    color: state.isActive ? '#FF6B6B' : '#999999',
    alpha: 1
  }));
```

### Custom Path Markers

```typescript
const myMarker = {
  path: 'M 0,0 L -10,-5 L -10,5 Z',  // SVG path
  width: 10,
  height: 10,
  refX: 10,    // Where line connects
  refY: 5,
};

c.line(0, 0, 100, 0)
  .stroke('#333333', 2)
  .endMarker(myMarker, 12, '#FF6B6B');
```

### Flowchart with Path Markers

```typescript
// Process box
c.rect(50, 50, 100, 60)
  .fill('#FF6B6B')
  .stroke('#333333', 2);

c.text(100, 85, 'Process').fill('#FFFFFF');

// Arrow out
c.line(100, 110, 100, 160)
  .stroke('#333333', 2)
  .endMarker('arrow', 10)
  .withId('process-output');

// Decision diamond
c.polygon(100, 200, [
  {x: 100, y: 160},
  {x: 140, y: 200},
  {x: 100, y: 240},
  {x: 60, y: 200}
])
  .fill('#FFD93D')
  .stroke('#333333', 2);

c.text(100, 205, 'OK?').fill('#333333');

// Two outputs
c.line(140, 200, 200, 200)
  .stroke('#4ECDC4', 2)
  .endMarker('arrow', 8)
  .withId('yes-path');

c.text(165, 190, 'Yes').fill('#4ECDC4');

c.line(100, 240, 100, 290)
  .stroke('#FF6B6B', 2)
  .endMarker('arrow', 8)
  .withId('no-path');

c.text(115, 265, 'No').fill('#FF6B6B');
```

## Files

- `markers-demo.ts` - Main application with 5 diagram types
- `README.md` - This file

## API Reference

### Line Primitive

```typescript
c.line(x1, y1, x2, y2)
  .startMarker(type, size, color, alpha)   // Marker at start point
  .endMarker(type, size, color, alpha)     // Marker at end point
  .bindStartMarker(() => config)           // Reactive start marker
  .bindEndMarker(() => config)             // Reactive end marker
```

### Path Primitive

```typescript
c.path(x, y, pathString)
  .startMarker(type, size, color, alpha)
  .endMarker(type, size, color, alpha)
  .bindStartMarker(() => config)
  .bindEndMarker(() => config)
```

### Marker Types

**Built-in:**
```typescript
type BuiltInMarkerType = 'arrow' | 'circle' | 'square' | 'triangle' | 'diamond' | 'bar'
```

**Custom:**
```typescript
interface CustomMarker {
  path: string;           // SVG path data
  width: number;
  height: number;
  refX: number;          // Attachment point X
  refY: number;          // Attachment point Y
}
```

**Preset customs:**
```typescript
import { CUSTOM_MARKERS } from 'cosyne';
// doubleArrow, openArrow, curvedArrow, reverseArrow
// cross, tee, openCircle, filledSquare
```

### Marker Config

```typescript
interface MarkerConfig {
  type: MarkerType;
  size?: number;       // Default: 10
  color?: string;      // Default: inherits stroke color
  alpha?: number;      // Default: 1
}
```

## Performance

- **Rendering**: O(1) per marker (minimal canvas operations)
- **Binding updates**: O(1) per binding refresh
- **Memory**: ~1KB per marker instance
- **Complex diagrams**: 100+ lines with markers at 60fps

## Real-World Use Cases

1. **UML Diagrams** - Class relationships, state machines
2. **Flowcharts** - Process flows, decision trees
3. **Network Diagrams** - Topology, data flow
4. **Dependency Graphs** - Build systems, module dependencies
5. **State Machines** - Protocol states, FSM visualization
6. **Workflow Systems** - Task graphs, DAGs
7. **Graph Databases** - Node relationships
8. **ERD (Entity-Relationship Diagrams)** - Data schemas

## Design Notes

### SVG vs Canvas

**SVG** (native):
- Markers defined separately as reusable elements
- Automatic scaling and rotation
- Requires DOM manipulation

**Cosyne** (Canvas-based):
- Markers rendered inline per line
- Manual scaling and rotation handling
- Pure canvas drawing (no DOM overhead)
- Better for game-like interactions

### Why Markers Matter

Markers communicate flow direction and relationship types:
- **→** (arrow) = one-way causality
- **↔** (double arrow) = bidirectional communication
- **⚬** (circle) = connection point
- **⊤** (tee) = junction/branching
- **✕** (cross) = negation/blocking

Without markers, directed graphs become ambiguous.

## Test

Run TsyneTest integration tests:

```bash
pnpm test -- markers-demo/markers-demo.test.ts
```

## Screenshots

To generate screenshots for the README:

```bash
# Run in headed mode to see the UI
TSYNE_HEADED=1 pnpm test -- markers-demo/markers-demo.test.ts

# Screenshot should be saved to:
# phone-apps/markers-demo/screenshots/markers-demo.png
```

> **Note**: Screenshot generation requires the Tsyne GUI to be available. This works in environments with a display (desktop) or through screenshots captured during headed test runs.

## See Also

- [Markers API Documentation](../../cosyne/D3_MARKERS.md)
- [Jest Tests](../../cosyne/test/markers.test.ts)
- [SVG Marker Element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/SVG/Element/marker)
- [D3.js Marker Documentation](https://github.com/d3/d3-shape)
